humans are clearly a product of natural
selection but thousands of years ago we
began to place barriers and buffers
between ourselves and the elements to
protect ourselves from the slings and
arrows of the natural world and that
does beg a question has all our
technologies sheltered us not only from
nature but from natural selection itself
it's a question that scientists have
wondered about ever since Darwin's time
has our culture or technology stopped us
evolving
[Music]
are we the same as the people that
emerged in Africa 200,000 years ago it's
an incredibly difficult question to
answer the trouble is how do we find out
if we've changed
I've come to Oxford where there's an
ancient clue that might help to unravel
the mystery tucked away in the
university's Natural History Museum are
the oldest bones of a modern human ever
found in the UK they were discovered by
the Reverend William Buckland 180 years
ago it seems that Buckland thought that
these could be the bones of a witch from
Roman times and they're stained with
Iruka they have this reddish appearance
so she became known as the red lady of
pavulon and the name is stuck but we now
know that these are not to the bones of
a 2,000 year old woman and I can see
very clearly that this pelvis is male
these are the bones of a man who lived
33,000 years ago
thirty three thousand years ago was
before the peak of the last ice age when
he was alive the red lady of pavulon
shared the planet with Neanderthals and
woolly mammoths still roamed the earth
so are these bones the same as mine
because if they are perhaps we have
stopped evolving now I'm a physical
anthropologist I've looked at hundreds
of skeletons but if I didn't know how
old these bones were that they'd been
radiocarbon dated to 33 thousand years
ago I'd believe you if you told me they
were a few hundred years old
of course there's variation in skeletons
there's variation in our bodies each of
us will have a different skeleton but
these bones fit within that modern range
of variation there's nothing in this
skeleton to suggest we've changed over
millennia
say perhaps or use of technology and
culture Brady has put us out of reach of
natural selection and halted our
evolution
you